Key points for 1st Year Physics topic Energy.

- Terminology
Energy : the ability o do work.
Kinetic Energy : energuy a moving body has.
Potential Energy : stored energy an object has due to its position.
Sound Energy : energy produced by a vibration.
Heat Energy : energy that travels between particles.
Chemical Energy : energy that is stored in chemical bonds.
Electrical Energy : energy that comes from the flow of electric charge.
Light Energy : energy that light has.
Nuclear Energy : energy produced from nuclear reactions.
Solar Energy : energy that comes from the Sun.
Energy Conservation : the need to avoid wasting useful forms of energy.
Energy Dissipation : when energy changes from a useful form to a not so useful form.
Energy Change : energy changing from one form to another.
Efficiency : how well something uses energy to do its job without wasting too much.

- Energy is measured in joules (J)
- Law of Conservation of Energy : Energy is neither created nor destroyed but can be converted from one form to another.
- Fossil fuels are non-renewable energy resources.
- They are the compressed remains of animals from millions of years ago.
- Examples of fossil fuels are
Peat
Oil
Gas
Coal
- Renewable resources will not run out in the short-term.
- Examples of renewable resources
Wind power
Hydro-electric power/Tidal
Biomass
Geothermal
Solar panels/Tubes
Solar cells
- Sankey diagrams show energy efficiency

Summary questions
- Explain the term 'energy'.
The ability to do work.

- Name eight forms of energy.
Sound
Potential
Solar
Electrical
Nuclear
Chemical
Thermal
Kinetic

- For each of the eight forms of energy you named in the previous question give an example of how the energy can cause motion.
Sound : sound energy vibrating the eardrums.
Potential : when the stored energy is released the elastic band snaps back into its normal postition.
Solar : solar energy from solar panels can change to electrical energy to charge your EV car.
Electrical : electricity charges things to move.
Nuclear : nuclear reactions can create energy to blast things apart.
Chemical : chemical energy from food is stored in your body so you can move.
Thermal : heat causes water particles to vibrate and move around, boiling it.
Kinetic : Wind can cause a windmill to move.

- Describe how energy is wasted in (a) a car engine (b) a TV (c) a central heating boiler.
(a) When chemical energy is converted to kinetic energy and heat energy, the heat energy is wasted.
(b) When electrical energy is converted to heat energy, light energy and sound energy, the heatenergy is wasted.
(c) Some heat energy is lost through the pipes.

- Would solar water heaters work better in Ireland or Spain? Give two reasons to support your answer.
Spain, because there is more sunlight in Spain than Ireland, which means more energy available. There are also longer warmer periods, which means they can work for more months of the year.

- Why are solar water heaters usually placed on only one side of the roof?
To maximise exposure to the Sun.

- We get chemical energy when we eat food. What kinds of food give more energy?
Food containg carbohydrates, fats and proteins.

- Describe the kind of weather that would cause a lot of heat energy to leave your body as you cycle.
Cold and windy. When it's cold, heat from your body moves to the colder surroundings. When it's windy, wind chill makes the surroundings feel colder.

- The Sun is often regarded as the primary source of energy. What does this mean?
Every other forms of energy originated with the Sun.

- What problem might arise with solar water heaters in extremely cold weather?
It will freeze up.

- What kind of light bulbs heat up only a little when they light up?
The efficient ones : LED light bulbs.